Hello friends
In this video let us learn how to construct a
binary heap from an array
For an example let us take an array of seven
elements
That is from index 0 to 6
As we know the binary heap is a complete binary tree
which satisfies the heap ordering property
So here we need to logically construct a complete
binary tree using this array. For that, for every index
of the array we need to find its left and right
child so that we can construct the complete binary
tree out of this array. Here array index starts at zero
Then the left child can be found in the index
2*i+1 and the right child can
be found in the index 2*i+2
Let us see how. For index zero, the left child
will be in 2*0+1
That is index 1 which is the element 20 .
And the right child will be in 2*0+2
that is index 2 which is Element 40
Similarly for Index one the left child will be
2*1+1 that is index 3 which is element 30 here
And the right child will be in index
2*1+2
That is index 4 which is element 80
Similarly for index 2, the left child will be
2*2+1
That is index 5 which is element 60 and the
right child will be in index 2*2+2
that is index 6 which is element 50 and
for index 3
The left child should be at index 2*3+1
that is 7 and right child should be
in index 2*3+2 that is 8
But these indices are not in the range. so we
can stop the processing now. That is we can understand
that the next elements should be the leaves of the
tree
In this example, we are going to construct a max heap.
In max heap,
the parent will always be larger than the children
This is applicable for every sub tree and hence the
root of the tree will be the maximum
in a max heap.
So let us construct the max heap. To construct max heap
or min heap
We need to satisfy the heap property from the bottom most
sub tree. Here we are going to construct the
Max heap so we need to satisfy the max heap property from
bottom most sub tree. Here which is the bottom most
sub tree ?
It is the sub tree with node 40 whose left
child is 60 and right child is 50. And the
second bottom most sub tree is this. This node 20
with left child 30 and right child 80 and
the top more sub tree is this one. The node 10
with left child 20 and right child 40
So first take the bottom most sub tree. Check if
it satisfies the max heap property that is parent should be
greater than children and the maximum value should be at
the root. Here the child 60 is greater than parent 40
So swap 60 and 40. Again we need to
check for the max heap property of the swapped index.
But now 40 doesn't have any left or right child.
So we can skip this. Now the maximum element 60 is
placed in subtree's root. Now it satisfies the max heap
property
Next consider the second bottom most subtree. Here child 80
is greater than parent 20. So swap 80 and 20
Again
we need to check for the max heap property of the
swapped index
But again 20 doesn't have left and right
child. So we can skip this step
Now take the top most sub tree. Here child 80
is greater than parent 10. So swap 80 and 10
Again we need to check for the max heap property of
the swapped Index. Here 10 is root and 30 and
20 are its children. It doesn't satisfy the max heap property
that is the root must be the maximum among all
the nodes. Here 30 is greater than 10 and 20
swap 30 and 10. And again we need to check
for the max heap property of the swapped index. But now
10 doesn't have left and right child. so we can
skip this and our heapify process is done
for all sub trees from bottom most node. Now this
complete tree exactly satisfies the maxheap property
The maximum element 80 is present at the root and
every subtree's root value is the maximum of its
children
So this is how we can construct a heap from
an array.
Now let's see how to implement this. As we discussed
the procedure to construct the heap is find the bottom
most sub tree and from the bottom most sub tree
to top check and satisfy the heap property
Here we have two functions
First is build_heap which will call the heapify
function to satisfy the heap property from the bottom most
node and the heapify function will find
the left and right nodes and arranges it based on
the heap property
First let us understand the build_heap function
The array and the last index of the array are passed
into this function
Total array size is 7 here and the size is the last index
of the array that is 7-1 which is
equal to 6
And as we discussed the build_heap function will call
the heapify function from the bottom
most node
In general we can get the bottom most node using
size by two
So this for loop will run from size by 2
to 0 that is bottom most sub tree root
to index zero that is top most sub tree root node
For every sub tree index it will call the
heapify function. So now
size/ 2 is equal to 6/2 which is 3.
So heapify function is called with index 3 along with the arr
and size 6
So here index equal to 3 and size equal to 6
Let us first find the left and right child of
the node at this index. So left equal to
2*index+1 that is 2*3+1
which is equal to 7
And now let us find the right child. right equal to
to left+1 that is 7+1
which is equal to 8
Initially we keep the max and index at the same
index
If the max heap property is not satisfied Max Index will
be changed
If max and index still point to the same index after
the left and right value checking it means this subtree
obeys the max heap property
So whenever max is not equal to index swap the
element and call the heapify function with max
index again. Let's see how this works
So here max equal to index 3 now. Now check
if left and right child is greater than this node
So we have if left less than or equal to
size and arr[left] greater than arr[max]
But this fails as left 7 is not less than
or equal to size. So check the next if,
it also fails
Since right index 8 is also not less than or
equal to size
Now check if Max was updated. It hasn't. So if
failed again
And this function is completed now and control gets back
to build_heap function. Here in next iteration of the
for loop, i is equal to 2 and heapify
is called by passing array arr. i equal to 2 and
size equal to 6
So here in this function index equal to 2 and
Let us first find the left and right children of
node at this index
So left = 2*index+1 that is
2*2+1 which is 5 and
right equal to left+1 that is 6
And as we said initially, we keep the max and
index at the same position
So max equal to index 2 that is
we are assuming that this sub tree satisfies the heap property and
if any child is greater than parent
We update Max
And finally if max and index are different we have
to perform swap operation
So now max equal to  2
Now check if left child is greater than this node
So we have if left less than or equal to size
and arr[left] greater than arr[max]
And we have five less than size and 60 greater
than 40
The left child is greater than parent. So update Max
So max equal to left now
that is index 5
Now check if right child is greater than max
So we have if right less than or equal to size
and arr[right] greater than arr[max]
And we have six equal to size and 50 not
greater than 60
So it fails. And see,
Now we have the maximum value of this sub tree
at Max
So we have found the maximum value of this subtree
Now we have to rearrange it.
So check
If max was updated, that is max was initially set
to index now check
If max and index are the same and it is
not. So if condition is true, so swap elements at
Max and Index that is 60 and 40 are swapped
so that the maximum element is now at the root
position. Again we need to check for the max heap property of the
swapped index
So call heapify again by passing array, max and
size
So here
index equal to 5 and size equal to 6
Let us first find the left and right children of
node at this index so left equal to
2*index+1 that is 2*5+1
which is 11 and right equal to
left+1 that is 12 and set max equal to index
that is 5 now
Now check if left and right child is greater than
this node
So we have if left less than or equal to
size and arr[left] greater than arr[max]
But this fails as left
11 is not less than or equal to size 6
So check the next if. It also fails since right
index 12 is also not less than or equal to size
now check
If Max was updated and it was not. So if
failed again and the function is completed and control gets
back to build heap function and here in next iteration
i is equal to 1 and heapify is called
by passing array arr, i equal to 1 and size equal to 6
So here index equal to 1 and size equal to 6
Now let us find the left and right children of node at this
Index
So left equal to 2*index+1 that is
2*1+1 which is 3 and right
equal to left+1 which is 4
And as we said initially we will keep the max
and index at the same position
So Max equal to index 1. That is we are
assuming that this sub tree satisfies the heap property
And this value at this node is the maximum value
So now max equal to 1.
And now check
If left child is greater than this node
And here we have three less than size and 30
greater than 20
That is the left child is greater than parent
So update max and max equal to left now.
that is 3. Now check if right child is greater than max
So we have if right less than or equal to size
and arr[right] greater than arr[max]
and we have four less than size
So first condition is satisfied and next we have
80 greater than 30
So that is also satisfied
That is right child is greater than current max value so
it should be updated
So set max equal to right that is four and
see
Now we have the maximum value of this sub tree
at max.
Now check
If Max was updated that is max was initially said
to index now check
If Max and index are the same and it is not
that means we have to perform swap operation since we
have found a greater element at child position
So swap elements at Max and Index that is
80 and 20
So now the maximum element is at the root position
Again we need to check for the max heap property of
the swapped index. So call heapify again by passing
array, max and size. So here index equal to 4
and size equal to 6
Let us first find the left and right children of
the node at this index. So left equal to
2*index+1 that is 2*4+1
which is 9 and right equal to left+1
that is 10 and now set max equal to index
That is 4. Now check if any child is greater
than parent
So we have if left less than or equal to size
and arr[left] greater than arr[max]
But it fails as left 9
is not less than or equal to size.
So check the next if it also fails since right index 10
is also not less than or equal to size
Now check
If Max was updated and it was not. So it
fails and the function is now completely executed and control
gets back to build_heap function
And here in next iteration i is equal to zero and
heapify is called by passing arr
i equal to zero and size equal to 6
So here index equal to 0 and size equal to 6
Let us first find the left and right child of node
At this index the left equal to
2*index+1 that is 2*0+1
which is 1 and right equal to left+1
that is 2
And as we said first we are assuming that this
sub tree satisfies the heap property
So keep Max and index at the same position
And if any child is greater than parent we will
update Max
So finally if Max and index are different we have to
perform swap operation
So right now Max equal to zero
Now check if left child is greater than this node
So we have if left less than or equal to size
and arr[left] greater than max
And we have one less than size and 80 greater than 10
so left child is greater than parent so update max
max equal to left now. that is 1. Now
check if right child is greater than Max. So we
have if right less than or equal to size and arr[right]
greater than arr[max] and we have
2 less than size but 60 is not greater than 80
So if fails and see now we have the maximum
value of this sub tree at max
Now check if max was updated. That is max was
initially set to index. Now check if max and index are
the same but max equal to 2 and index equal to 0
So it is not the same
So if condition is true now so swap elements at
Max and Index that is 80 and 10
Now the maximum element is at the root position. Again
we need to check for the max heap property for the
swapped index
So call heapify again by passing array, max
and size
So here index equal to 1 and size equal to 6
Now let us find
the left and right child of the node at this
index. So left equal to 2*index+1
that is 2*1+1 which is 3
and right equal to left+1 that is 4
now set max equal to index That is 1.
Now check if left and right child is greater than this node
So we have if left less than or equal
to size and arr[left] greater than arr[max ]
and left 3 is less than size and arr[left] 30
is greater than arr[max] 10. So update
Max. That is set Max to left that is 3
now check the right child
We have right 4 less than size
but arr[right] 20 is not greater than arr[max] 30
So if fails. Now check
If Max was updated and it was. So swap elements
at Max and Index and again we need to check
for max heap property for the swapped index
So call heapify
again by passing array, max and size
So here index equal to 3 and size equal to 6
Now let us find the left and right child of the
node
At this index the left equal to 2*index+1
that is 2*3+1 which
is 7 and right equal to left+1 that
is 8 and set max equal to index
That is 3 now. Now check if left and right child
is greater than this node
But if fails as left 7 is not less than or equal
to size and the next if also fails
Since right Index 8 is also not less than or
equal to size and the next if also fails
Since max was not updated. So the function is completed now
and control gets back to build_heap and in the
next iteration i equal to -1 and the condition
i greater than or equal to zero fails and control comes
out of the for loop
and see
Now this complete tree exactly satisfies the max heap property
The maximum Element 80 is present at the root and
every sub tree's root value is maximum of its children
So that is how we can construct a binary heap
from an array
We learned how to construct a heap
We have to find the bottom most sub tree and
from the bottom most sub tree to top
We have to check and satisfy the heap property.
that is for Max heap
The parent should be greater than its children and for
Min heap
The parent should be smaller than its children and we
also learned how to implement it
And in implementation we have two functions
First is build_heap which will call the heapify
function to satisfy the heap property from the bottom most
node and the heapify function will find the
left and right nodes and arranges it based on the
heap property
And finally we will have the complete tree which satisfies
the heap property
So that's all and in the next video we will
learn how to remove the max element from the constructed heap.